# We don't do Scrum

Here at PageUp, we have mature, effective agile practices. We value the the principles of agile, of being adaptable and flexible to change, of turning up the good stuff and trimming away the excess. But we don't do Scrum. In this talk I want to explore what Scrum is, how it differs from what we do at PageUp and maybe give you some techniques that you can take from Scrum to improve your processes.

Let's start by going back to those key values of agile that I'm sure you're all aware of. Here's the Agile Manifesto values. ⬤ That's not to say we don't value the things on the right, we just value the things on the left more.

 Agile is way of working that encourages building the right thing at the right time for the right people, anything that isn't helping achieve these goals is left behind. An example is documentation, this line ⬤ "Working software over documentation" means that while we value documentation, we prefer working software. This wisdom comes from a lot of software projects that have spent excessive time documenting requirements, architecture, implementation and user guides. Writing these and maintaining them can distract from the goal of delivering quality software on time. So at PageUp we write just in time user documentation on the knowledge portal, we only write as much about a requirement as is needed and we try to make our code as self describing as possible. 

⬤ There are a number of frameworks that come under the agile umbrella, including Scrum, Kanban, XP, Lean and more, they all bring unique ways of implementing agile practices within development teams. Scrum's roots go back to the early 90's, long before the inception of the Agile Manifesto in 2001 and has been the result of ongoing development and refinement since. Scrum encourages fast feedback loops called Inspect and Adapt Loops that help development teams respond quickly to change. 

⬤ There are many Inspect and Adapt Loops built into Scrum, the longest loops will last for a Sprint. Sprint long inspect and adapt activities include Sprint Planning, Sprint Review and Sprint Retrospectives. Within the Sprint shorter loops include continuous integration testing of code and code reviews down to Daily Scrums and to almost immediate loops from peer programming.

Scrum is very prescriptive in it's rules, to be doing Scrum you need to follow the rules correctly. ⬤ Like in chess, if you don't play by the rules of Scrum then you're not doing Scrum. Many established organisations who attempt Scrum fail because they try to fit it into their own processes from the outset and while they go through some of the motions, they don't reap the benefits. That isn't to say Scrum is the only way to do agile properly, it's just that either you're doing it, or you're not. ⬤ Scrum practitioners often talk about a concept called Shu-Ha-Ri to describe how development teams can adopt Scrum to be effective.

Shu-Ha-Ri is a Japanese martial arts concept that describes 3 stages of learning towards mastery.

Shu means to learn the art, to "protect" or "obey" the rules and apply them correctly. In this way, organisations trying to evolve from traditional waterfall are encouraged to follow the Scrum rules exactly till they start to see the benefits.

Ha means to "detach" or "digress", it means to break the rules where appropriate and where carefully considered. Now that the team are effectively practising Scrum they can start to tweak the rules to what fits them best.

Ri means to "leave" or "separate" from the rules. To transcend. At this stage the team has mastered agile and have no need for the Scrum rules as they understand the reasoning behind them and can apply the agile principles instinctually.

⬤ So what are the rules of Scrum? Well the Scrum framework can be broken down into 3 categories; roles, artefacts and ceremonies.

⬤ Let's start with the roles. A Scrum team is made up of 5 - 9 team members, a ScrumMaster and a Product Owner. 

⬤ The team members need to be cross skilled, self motivated and self organising. Scrum teams can be made up of professionals from all disciples including developers, testers and business analysts, but each one needs to be prepared to contribute to any activity that's required by the team, be it requirements gathering, system design, development or testing. It's not ok to have the team blocked waiting for a tester to become available to test their code.

⬤ The Product Owner is the business representative within the team, it's their responsibly to own and prioritise the Product Backlog, and to set the vision for what the team is trying to achieve. The Product Owner sets the Release Criteria, they decide whether a release will be time driven or scope driven. If it's time driven then a release is planned for a set date and the scope of what is included will vary. If it's scope driven then the release won't happen until a minimum level of functionality is achieved. Often the Product Owner role is filled by a manager or sponsor within the business who may only be part time working with the Scrum team. The Product Owner cannot be a member of the team and they cannot be the ScrumMaster.

⬤ The ScrumMaster makes sure everyone is playing by the rules of Scrum. They are responsible for ensuring everyone in the team understands their role and responsibilities and they coordinate the teams activities and facilitate the ceremonies. They're responsible for helping unblock any external dependencies, such as getting time with clients or business members, or making sure the product owner is available to answer any questions from the team. The ScrumMaster may also be a development team member, but it's discouraged. 

⬤ There are some typical artefacts that can be found in most agile teams. The names of them usually vary but Scrum gives them explicit terms to remove any ambiguity. 

The first artefact is the Product Backlog. ⬤ The Product Backlog is made up of Product Backlog Items, at PageUp we call them stories, they are specific scenarios that we want to cater for in our software. Scrum doesn't mandate how they are written, but usually it is in the form of a user story, ⬤ "As a Product Owner I want to have the items at the top of the Product Backlog be well defined and scoped so that they are ready to be picked up by the team".

⬤ The Product Backlog is owned by the Product Owner who is the sole person allowed to prioritise the Product Backlog Items. Ideally every Product Backlog Item has a size estimate on it, Scrum doesn't mandate how to do sizing of the items, that's left up to the team, the important thing is that every size on every item is relative to other items. At PageUp, we use a few techniques including story point sizing, t-shirt sizing like small, medium or large, and perfect developer days. By sizing every item it enables us to predict when a Product Backlog Item will be delivered. This is a key point, developers don't estimate when something will be done, it's predicted from past performance. 

Scrum doesn't mandate any charts, reports or tools, in fact it promotes using as little tooling as is necessary to avoid undue process, but there are some suggested information radiators that are very useful in Scrum. The first is the Release Burndown. The Release Burndown allows the team to predict what date the release will be ready given a fixed scope. ⬤ For instance, if the Product Owner has decided the team need to complete all the Product Backlog Items above a release line, or it could be the entire Product Backlog, before they can release, ⬤ then each sprint we graph the remaining size of the backlog above line, usually by taking the points burnt down in the sprint from the top of the bar, and appending or deducting the work added or removed from the release to the bottom of the bar. This allows us to draw two lines whose intersection is the predicted date that all the release will be ready. The top line, shown in red here, is the sprint velocity, which is the average of the number of points completed in each sprint. 

It's worth noting that sprint velocity is not a good measure of productivity. Sprint velocity can be impacted by things such as team capacity or delays such as technical challenges or UX research depending on the type of work that needs to be done. Ideally productivity should be measured in working, maintainable and fit for purpose software.

The Release Burndown can be charted manually on paper, using a simple template in Excel or using project management software. Again, the team need to decide what is most effective for them.

⬤ The Sprint is a core concept in Scrum. A sprint is a fixed period of time that the team will work on a fixed set of Product Backlog Items, sprints can be anywhere from 1 week to 1 month with a preference to the shorter. While constant change to the upcoming work for the team is acceptable and encouraged, change within the sprint is not. The sprint gives the development team certainty about what they're working to so they can plan. Once started, a Product Owner is not allowed to change scope within the sprint without the agreement of the entire team, and it's the ScrumMaster's responsibility to enforce this. 

⬤ At the start of a sprint, the team create a Sprint Backlog. This is done by the Product Owner presenting a list of the next Product Backlog Items they want delivered, and the team breaking these down into more discrete tasks and estimating them. While we size Product Backlog Items in relative story points, we estimate Sprint tasks in actual hours to get a realistic estimate of how much work can be done in this sprint. By giving all the sprint tasks an estimate, and then estimating our capacity (or number of actual development hours the team will do) for the sprint, the team determines how many Product Backlog Items they'll get through. Here's another key point, the team decide on how much they can do in the Sprint, not the Product Owner. The Product Owner only gets to decide the order of those items. The Sprint Backlog is usually represented as a physical or virtual wall of cards. One row for each Product Backlog Item and multiple columns to move the tasks across as they progress. The act of physically moving cards helps the team be aware of where all the tasks are and is a chance to celebrate success.

Each day during the sprint the team will burn down their sprint tasks by estimating how many hours are left on the tasks given what they know now. There's a subtle difference to estimating what's left compared to what's been completed, if we do the latter then it's a measure of the developers performance yesterday, which can can be prone to exaggeration, whereas the former, estimating what's left, can accommodate for new understanding. ⬤ The sprint burndown is usually captured in another information radiator, the Sprint Burndown Chart, which gives an indication of whether the team will complete the sprint or not. It's normal for the burndown line to plateau or even go up at the start of the sprint as everyone picks up new tasks to work on and then towards the end of the sprint it can sharply decline. The team usually gets familiar with the signature of their Sprint Burndown Charts and know what's normal and what indicates they're not going to complete all the work.

⬤ At the end of the sprint the team should produce a potentially shippable product increment. It's potentially shippable because while it must be working and functional, it may not make a coherent user experience without other Product Backlog Items being done, but the key is that the items completed in this sprint are completely done, ready to be delivered. The team needs to agree on what done means, this is called the Definition of Done. ⬤ For each Scrum team this definition can vary so it's left to the team to create their own definition. It should be as done as is possible, including code review, testing and merging branches. For some teams it might also include deployment to live. Some Scrum teams will have a Definition of Done for a task, for a Product Backlog Item and for the sprint as a whole.

⬤ We've discussed the roles in Scrum of Product Owner, ScrumMaster and Team Members, we've also looked at the artefacts including Product Backlog, Sprint Backlog, Definition of Done and Product Increment, and we're seen some information radiators like Release Burndown and Sprint Burndown Charts. Now let's look at the ceremonies in Scrum, ceremonies are the face to face meetings that help keep communication going, they are important as highlighted by one of the agile principles ⬤ "The most efficient and effective method of conveying information to and within a development team is face-to-face conversation.".

⬤ We've discussed that the Sprint Backlog gets created at the start of a Sprint, this is done in a Sprint Planning meeting. Only the Product Owner, ScrumMaster and team members are invited to the Sprint Planning meeting to allow for free conversation and realistic estimates. Sprint Planning is usually time boxed to 2 hours for every week in the sprint. So if you run 2 week sprints then planning is time boxed to 4 hours. The first half of sprint planning is dedicated to the Product Owner to present the items they want to be worked on and elaborate on them as much as possible, the team is encouraged to ask as many questions as they need to get a clear understanding of the work involved. The second half of the meeting is then given over to the developers to discuss solutions to the Product Backlog Items and to break them into discrete tasks before estimating them. By working out the teams capacity for this sprint the ScrumMaster can work with the team to determine how many of The Product Backlog Items they'll be able to achieve this sprint. The Product Owner is welcome to stay for this discussion or leave.

Once the Sprint Backlog has been created developers then take tasks off the backlog as they become available. ⬤ Each morning the team will have a Daily Scrum meeting where everyone presents what they worked on yesterday, what they will work on today and any blockers they have. It's important that the Daily Scrum doesn't turn into a discussion and it's the ScrumMaster's responsibility to keep everyone on track and get through it as quickly as possible, parking any topics for further discussion after the meeting. The Daily Scrum shouldn't last for more than 15 minutes. The Sprint Backlog should be updated during the Daily Scrum with the estimates of what time is left for each task.

⬤ Sometime during the Sprint, the Product Owner, ScrumMaster and team members will hold a Backlog Refinement meeting. During this meeting any new Product Backlog Items should be sized and the Product Backlog should be re-prioritised as needed. Usually a Product Owner will use both business value and development effort to determine the best order for return on investment. It's worth noting that the Product Owner can add new Product Backlog Items to the Product Backlog at any time, but again, only the Product Owner can order them. 

⬤ At the end of the sprint the team will hold a Sprint Retrospective and a Sprint Review. The retro is an opportunity for the team to discuss the process and any changes they think would help. The retro is an important tool in the Inspect and Adapt loop, it encourages tuning the team processes in  order to do more of the good stuff and less of the bad. Sprint Retrospectives can vary in style between teams, but usually the team is asked to assess what worked well, what didn't work well and what the team should do differently. The Sprint Retrospective is time boxed to 1.5 hours for a 2 week sprint.

⬤ Around the same time as the Sprint Retro the team will also hold a Sprint Review, the review is intended to showcase the work the team has done during the sprint in order to gain feedback and assess whether it meets the needs of the business. Anyone is welcome to the Sprint Review, and we encourage as many stakeholders to attend as possible. The Sprint Review is not intended to be a presentation but a time for every to reflect on the product in a non-judgemental environment. Everyone is encouraged to share their thoughts and usually the feedback from the Sprint Review is added to the Product Backlog for prioritisation. The Sprint Review is time boxed to 2 hours for a 2 week sprint.

⬤ That, in a nutshell, is the Scrum framework. Much of PageUp's own agile processes borrow concepts from Scrum. Our teams organise their work in Sprints and do Sprint Planning, Sprint Retrospectives, Daily Standups and Iteration Reviews in a similar way to Sprint Reviews, although I feel our Iteration Reviews are much more of a presentation and would benefit from Scrums principles of making it more of an honest discussion between the team and the stakeholders. In our last Iteration Review Redfin handed the demo over to one our guests from CDT and found it useful to have them walk through the scenario, it prompted more feedback from the audience and made us think about different ways the software is used.

Owen and I have also started holding Backlog Refinement sessions to try and size all the stories and to prioritise product stories with technical debt management. 

Scrum things we don't do are we don't break stories into tasks and give each an hourly estimate, most streams don't track their Sprint Burndown, although I think Manta Rays do. I think the Wahoo's have developed a Definition of Done for their stories but not all streams have this agreement, and we don't have ScrumMasters in each team. But for the most part I think we've found what works for us and trimmed away the excess. As long as it's a conscious decision and not a lack of of understanding then I think it's appropriate to do what works.

Thanks.